# DIY replace your BlendDoor actuator on your 1997-2002 Ford Expedition
Are you looking to replace your blenddoor actuator on your 1997–2002 Ford Expedition? Well here's a breakdown for your convenience I couldn’t find any instructions myself and struggled to find any YouTube videos showcasing the easiest way of doing this.

To start, please confirm it is your blenddoor actuator, typically you can hear it tick. If you hear nothing, and you ultimately believe it to be your blenddoor actuator and you are unsure and can’t hear a ticking sound, buy silver tape (used in duct work for HVAC) pull your glovebox out, (all the way is preferred if not its fine) using a multitool or oscillating tool (for people without this, use a boxcutter and heat the replaceable blade to a cherry red or extremely hot) and you will cut an access panel out of the heater box (DIRECTLY BEHIND YOUR GLOVEBOX, IT IS BLACK). When cutting, make sure for the top cut you cut with the blade aiming down, and when cutting your cut at the bottom of the access panel you cut upwards, with is to prevent the piece from falling back inside when you tape that piece back into the heater box using the silver tape. With the access panel now cut, you can view the inside of the heater box, you will notice the blenddoor, (a common failure on these models, you can Google this part to figure out what you are looking for) put your key in the ignition turn it to accessory mode, turn your temperature knob, and you see (or not see) this move. If it moves, your issue is not the blenddoor actuator. Check the blenddoor itself for issues, if problems persist it may be an external factor (which I will not go into).

After confirming that it is indeed your actuator, you will need to remove your center console, which is a process of finding all the screws, it has been some time since I’ve done this repair so forgive me for any mistakes, you will need to empty your center console, there are several screws inside of the center console (the bin to hold whatever and CD player). You will remove all of them, and you will unscrew everything inside of it, if you are not using the factory radio, when reinstalling the center console you can remove this part and put electrical tape around the connector, there are two screws in the rear of the console one on each side of the console, you will see by pushing both front seats all the way forward. The next scews are inside the back cup holders on the center console, and underneath the rear radio controls (do not remove this even without stock radio, if not plugged in it will mess up rear speakers) there will be additional scews once you remove the rubber cover by the change holder. Pull it out, and then there will be screws (or a screw) there. Remove that screw and pull the top of the console off using a screwdriver (please use a plastic tool, not metal, if you don't care you can use a flathead screwdriver as I did) once this is off, you will be able to pull out the box (containing the CD player) unplug the cables and pull off. You can also unplug the rear radio controls now, and remove that. There are a few screws on the inside of the remaining center console, you can remove them and pull that out (maybe another panel that pops out remove that first).

Once the center console is fully removed, there is a plastic panel at the front of it, on the floor, the floor vents are next to the clips for this plastic panel to be removed (clips on both driver and passenger side). Pull out, using a sawzall (be VERY CAREFUL) cut the passenger floor vent (about halfway down so we can silver tape it back together). Once you can access the blenddoor actuator, take a wrench (or if you have it, a slim ratchet or ratchet wrench) and remove the four screws, once down, pull downwards until you can pull it out. The blenddoor actuator you have bought should be set to the same thing as what your blenddoor is positioned, so if the blenddoor is fully closed, make sure your temp control is set to cold, and plug the actuator in and let it go to the position for cold (it may move slowly).

Retape the floor vent and you should be fine, using the access panel we have cut in the heaterbox ensure full range of motion, and ensure the part works before continuing. If it isn’t working it is defective or you are not getting power, use a voltmeter or light circuit tester. If voltage or light glows, your unit is defective, if power is not there, check the wires.

Once everything is confirmed working, tape the heater box back together, put your plastic access panel into the slot, and using silver-tape, tape the access panel shut. You may reassemble.

From my experience, this is the fastest way to do this.
